doc: usage docs for the tokenomics smart contracts (#3082)
streamr-dev/network: docs/docs/streamr-network/smart-contracts.md

---

# Smart contracts
Streamr can be deployed on any EVM compatible chain. Current deployments are Polygon PoS and the Polygon Amoy testnet.

- The Stream Registry [smart contracts](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/tree/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/StreamRegistry)
- Incentive layer Operator [smart contracts](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/tree/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics)

## Smart contract usage

> Please refer to the [network incentives document](./incentives/network-incentives.md) for the high-level description of the tokenomics system. There you also find described two processes: delegation and staking. In delegation, node operators receive DATA tokens from delegators who then receive a share of the profits generated by the operators. In staking, node operators stake the DATA tokens into Sponsorship contracts, and withdraw earnings; sponsoring is included in the staking process as well.

Reviewer: Could mention external delegators. What do you mean that sponsoring is included in the staking process? If I've understood correctly, it is a separate process.

Author: it's part of the process where stakers get paid in the Sponsorship. The tokens come from the sponsors.

> The relevant transactions in the delegation process are:

Reviewer: Could make the list easier to read if we highlighted the actions? E.g. **Delegation**, sending DATA tokens...

Author: good idea. I think we should do this in some kind of collaborative editing platform instead of PR reviews. This is really a quite tedious way to write documentation.

Author: for instance, I'll now highlight "delegation" and "staking", but it would be easier if you just highlighted whatever you feel needs to be highlighted.

> - Delegation, sending DATA tokens into the Operator contract: [`DATA.transferAndCall(operatorAddress, amountWei, "0x")`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L271)

Reviewer: I'd remove the links. Two reasons:
- The line numbers will get out-of-date at some point and that will cause confusion.
- Currently the code contains API documentation information but also significant amount of internal commenting. It could make to generate a proper API documentation and link to that.

Author: I find those links very useful. But ok, now they're removed.

>   - `transferAndCall` will then activate the Operator contract to register the delegation

Reviewer: Is registering the delegation something that users should need to know? If I understood correctly, that is just one of the very low-level actions which happen in the contract when that method is called.

```suggestion
```

  - the DATA tokens will only return immediate insofar as the Operator contract happens to hold non-staked tokens. The undelegation goes into a queue that gets resolved when DATA returns to the Operator, either via withdrawing or unstaking. The queue takes always precedence: delegators are paid their DATA before they can be re-staked.
  - in case the operator doesn't withdraw earnings and/or unstake enough tokens to pay out the queued delegators, then after 30 days, anyone can force the Operator contract to unstake from a sponsorship contract: [`Operator.forceUnstake(sponsorshipAddress, 0)`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L441)

The relevant transactions in the staking process are:
- Staking, sending DATA tokens from Operator to Sponsorships: [Operator.stake(sponsorshipAddress, amountWei)](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L404)
  - this same function can be used for adding stake, so calling this 2nd time with same arguments will double the stake (*not* idempotent)

>   - once staked, the operator must start also brokering the streams associated with the Sponsorship, or risk getting slashed from the stake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - once staked, the operator must start relaying the streams associated with the Sponsorship, or risk having their stake slashed
```

> - Withdrawing, pulling DATA token earnings from Sponsorship: [Operator.withdrawEarningsFromSponsorships(sponsorshipAddressList)](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L467)

Reviewer: Could re-order the list so that all stake-related actions are together and withdrawing is the last item in the list

Author: rough chronological order maybe works too?

> - Unstaking, pulling DATA token earnings and all stake from Sponsorship: [Operator.unstake(sponsorshipAddress, amountWei)](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L427)

Reviewer: This could be a bullet point under the "Reducing stake" action. Something like: "If you want to unstake your whole stake, you can call `Operator.unstake(sponsorshipAddress, amountWei)`. Note that it also pull DATA token earnings from that sponsorship."

Author: withdrawing is different from reducing stake

>   - once unstaked, the operator may stop brokering the streams associated with the Sponsorship; they receive the stake back, so slashing can't happen anymore

Reviewer: Is this same true in all cases where the stake is reduced to zero? If so, we can move this bullet point into "Reducing stake" section.

Author: reducing stake to non-zero is an intent different from unstaking

>   - once unstaked, the operator may stop brokering the streams associated with the Sponsorship; they receive the stake back, so slashing can't happen anymore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - once unstaked, the operator may stop brokering the streams associated with the Sponsorship
```

Author: added more explanation. There is a point, it's good to say it.

- Reducing stake, pulling some stake back from Sponsorship: [Operator.reduceStakeTo(sponsorshipAddress, targetStakeWei)](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L413)

>   - calling this 2nd time with same arguments will fail with `Sponsorship.CannotIncreaseStakeUsingReduceStakeTo` error

Reviewer: Why that would happen? Or do you mean if you call it second time while the previous transaction is still pending?

Author: Operator might want to rebalance stakes

> - Sponsoring: [`DATA.transferAndCall(operatorAddress, amountWei, "0x")`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Sponsorship.sol#L148)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sponsoring, sending DATA tokens into the Sponsorship contract: [`DATA.transferAndCall(operatorAddress, amountWei, "0x")`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Sponsorship.sol#L148)
```

>   - `transferAndCall` will then activate the Sponsorship contract to register the sponsoring

Reviewer: Is registering the activating or registration something that users should need to know? If I understood correctly, that is just one of the very low-level actions which happen in the contract when that method is called.

```suggestion
```

> ### ERC20 compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alternative interaction for non-EIP-677 environments
```

Author: it's **specifically** about being usable with ERC20 token contracts, the term environment is... something I haven't used here iirc

Author: but ok added clarification

> The tokenomics contracts have been written in such a way that `transferAndCall` isn't strictly required from the token, but any ERC20 token will also work. This however will require an extra `approve` transaction on the token before the actual smart contract call that does the sponsoring or delegating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contracts have been written in such a way that it the sending token doesn't need to be EIP-677 compatible (i.e. implement the `transferAndCall()` method). Any ERC20 token will also work.

When interacting with non-EIP-677 tokens an extra `approve()` transaction is needed on the token. That transaction must be done before the actual smart contract call that does the sponsoring or delegating.
```

Author: the extra approve transaction was the whole reason this doc improvement was done in the first place! What's the point of removing reference to it?

Reviewer: What do you mean by removing a reference?

> When sponsoring, the `transferAndCall` can be replaced with an [`IERC20.approve(operatorAddress, amountWei)`](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/token/ERC20/IERC20.sol#L52) followed by [`Sponsorship.sponsor`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Sponsorship.sol#L171).
> 
> When delegating, the `transferAndCall` can be replaced with an [`IERC20.approve(operatorAddress, amountWei)`](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/token/ERC20/IERC20.sol#L52) followed by [`Operator.delegate(amountWei)`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L302).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When sponsoring, the `transferAndCall` can be replaced with an [`IERC20.approve(operatorAddress, amountWei)`](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/token/ERC20/IERC20.sol#L52) followed by [`Sponsorship.sponsor`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Sponsorship.sol#L171).
- When delegating, the `transferAndCall` can be replaced with an [`IERC20.approve(operatorAddress, amountWei)`](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/token/ERC20/IERC20.sol#L52) followed by [`Operator.delegate(amountWei)`](https://github.com/streamr-dev/network-contracts/blob/master/packages/network-contracts/contracts/OperatorTokenomics/Operator.sol#L302).
```

Author: I can't spot what the diff is here

Reviewer: Prefixed with bullet points dashes, removed empty line.
